Document tt export/import (#3737)
tarantool/doc: doc/reference/tooling/tt_cli/export.rst

.. _tt-export:

Exporting data
==============

..  admonition:: Enterprise Edition
    :class: fact

    This command is supported by the `Enterprise Edition <https://www.tarantool.io/compare/>`_ only.

..  code-block:: console

    $ tt [crud] export URI FILE SPACE [EXPORT_OPTION ...]

> ``tt [crud] export`` exports a space's data to a file.

Reviewer: Not sure if possessive is correct for this case (`space's data`).
Maybe rephrase? 

```suggestion
``tt [crud] export`` exports data from a given space to a file.
```

Reviewer: Also, maybe mention the file format in this general description?

Author: > a space's data

I believe, possessive works good for our `space` term. 

> Also, maybe mention the file format in this general description?

Currently, only CSV is supported but other formats may be added in the future. And given that CSV is the only supported format, `for example, CSV` will look a bit weird, too.

Reviewer: To be precise, I would write "to a CSV file". If other format appear later, we'll update the description.

The ``crud`` command is optional and can be used to export a cluster's data by using the `CRUD <https://github.com/tarantool/crud>`_ module. Without ``crud``, data is exported using the :ref:`box.space <box_space>` API.

``tt [crud] export`` takes the following arguments:

*   ``URI``: The URI of a router instance if ``crud`` is used. Otherwise, it should specify the URI of a storage.
*   ``FILE``: The name of a file for storing exported data.
*   ``SPACE``: The name of a space from which data is exported.

..  NOTE::

    :ref:`Read access <authentication-owners_privileges>` to the space is required to export its data.

> ..  NOTE::

Reviewer: Forgot to write in the first review: this should be `important` or even `warning` because the data loss is possible.

>     You should have :ref:`read access <authentication-owners_privileges>` to the required space to be able to export data.

Reviewer: It's unclear who is `you` in this sentence. The reader runs `tt` outside of Tarantool.
Shorter wording: `to the required space to be able to export data.` > `to the space to export its data`.

Author: Will update to `Read access to the space is required to export its data.`

>     Exporting isn't supported for the :ref:`interval <index-box_interval>` field type.

Reviewer: What exactly does it mean? Export does not work on spaces with such field? Export works but interval fields are lost? Anything else?

Author: I've checked: exporting works, data of this field is exported but looks unreadable and causes an error on an attempt to import it back.

The command below exports data of the ``customers`` space to the ``customers.csv`` file:

.. code-block:: console

    $ tt crud export localhost:3301 customers.csv customers

If the ``customers`` space has five fields (``id``, ``bucket_id``, ``firstname``, ``lastname``, and ``age``), the file with exported data might look like this:

.. code-block:: text

    1,477,Andrew,Fuller,38
    2,401,Michael,Suyama,46
    3,2804,Robert,King,33
    # ...

If a tuple contains a ``null`` value, for example, ``[1, 477, 'Andrew', null, 38]``, it is exported as an empty value:

.. code-block:: text

    1,477,Andrew,,38

.. _tt-export-header:

Exporting headers
-----------------

To export data with a space's field names in the first row, use the ``--header`` option:

.. code-block:: console

    $ tt crud export localhost:3301 customers.csv customers \
                     --header

In this case, field values start from the second row, for example:

.. code-block:: text

    id,bucket_id,firstname,lastname,age
    1,477,Andrew,Fuller,38
    2,401,Michael,Suyama,46
    3,2804,Robert,King,33
    # ...

.. _tt-export-compound-data:

Exporting compound data
-----------------------

> By default, ``tt`` exports empty values for fields containing compound data like arrays or maps.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default, ``tt`` exports empty values for fields containing compound data such as arrays or maps.
```

Reviewer: `like` - similar object, `such as` - actual examples.

To export compound values in a specific format, use the ``--compound-value-format`` option.
For example, the command below exports compound values serialized in JSON:

.. code-block:: console

    $ tt crud export localhost:3301 customers.csv customers \
                     --compound-value-format json

.. _tt-export-options:

Options
-------

..  option:: --batch-queue-size INT

>     Specify the maximum number of tuple batches in a queue between a fetch and write threads (the default is ``32``).

Reviewer: `Specify` and similar werbs seem redundant to me in options that have values. Why not just give the definition:
`-batch-queue-size: the maximum number...`?

I understand that they are optional and setting them _specifies_ some parameter (in contrast to undefined), but the shorter form is pretty common: https://cloud.google.com/sdk/gcloud/reference/compute/disks/update#GCLOUD-WIDE-FLAGS

Author: Maybe, will remove in all places.

    ``tt`` exports data using two threads:

    *   A *fetch* thread makes requests and receives data from a Tarantool instance.
    *   A *write* thread encodes received data and writes it to the output.

    The fetch thread uses a queue to pass received tuple batches to the write thread.
    If a queue is full, the fetch thread waits until the write thread takes a batch from the queue.

..  option:: --batch-size INT

    Specify the number of tuples to transfer per request (the default is ``10000``).

..  option:: --compound-value-format STRING

    Set a format used to export compound values like arrays or maps.
    By default, ``tt`` exports empty values for fields containing such values.

    Supported formats: ``json``.

    See also: :ref:`Exporting compound data <tt-export-compound-data>`.

..  option:: --header

>     Specify whether to add field names in the first row.

Reviewer: Will the short form be enough? 

```suggestion
    Add field names in the first row.
```
